In this video, we'll learn
some of the terminology and
notation used with inheritance.
The terminology we use is
pretty straightforward, but it's
important that it's clear since
you'll be using it throughout
your career as a c++ developer.
First, let's review inheritance.
As we've already seen, inheritance
is the process of creating new
classes from existing classes.
It's a mechanism that allows
us to reuse existing code.
When we use inheritance to
create a new class, there may
be several classes involved.
In this course, we'll mainly talk
about single inheritance that
is when we create a new class
based on another single class.
Multiple inheritance is when
we create a new class from
two or more other classes.
The classes that are involved in
the inheritance relationship also
have terms associated with them.
The base class is the class
being extended or inherited from.
This class is also referred to as
the parent class or super class
in the inheritance relationship.
The derived class is the class that's
being created from the base class.
This class will inherit the attributes
and operations from the base class.
And this class is also referred to
as the child class or the subclass.
You can see in the diagram, the
commonly used notation used to
express this inheritance relationship.
We draw a solid line between the
base class and the derived class
with a closed unfilled arrowhead or
triangle pointing to the base class.
This is a uml class diagram and
can also show much more information
about the classes we're modeling.
A very important concept to
understand is that of an is a
relationship with object-oriented
programming and inheritance.
When we use classic or public
inheritance, our derived
classes are generally subtypes
of their base classes.
This implies an is a relationship.
So a circle is a shape, a
savings account is an account.
This very simple concept will provide
us with a great deal of power.
We'll learn how to leverage this
is a relationship in the next
section of the course when we
learn about polymorphic functions.
Generalization is about combining
similar classes into a single,
more general class based on
the class's common attributes.
The more general class is obviously
more abstract and can therefore
potentially be reused more easily.
Specialization is the
opposite of generalization.
This is about creating new
classes from existing classes.
And these new classes generally
add attributes and operations
to the already inherited ones.
As programmers and designers, we use
both generalization and specialization
to create inheritance hierarchies.
Inheritance hierarchies is how we
organize our inheritance relationships
so that we can more effectively
organize and reuse our code.
Let's see a simple example.
In this example, we have classes
a b c d, and e and we have public
inheritance that is is a relationship
between derived and based classes.
You can see that class a is not
being derived from any other class.
This class is often referred to as
the root class in the hierarchy.
B is derived from a, c is also
derived from a, d is derived
from c and e is derived from d.
You can see the class
hierarchy in the diagram.
Notice that the higher up
we go in the hierarchy, the
more general our classes are.
And the lower we go in our hierarchy,
the more specialized they are.
Also notice the is a relationships.
In this example, b is an a.
C is also an a since they're both
derived from the class a, and e is a
d because e is derived from class d.
Now notice that e is also a c
since inheritance is transitive.
In fact, in this
example, e is also an a.
However, class b is not a c.
There is no inheritance relationship
directly between b and c.
Let's look at a more concrete example.
In this example, we have
a root class person that's
the most general or abstract
class in this class hierarchy.
We can see that student
is derived from person.
So a student is a person and
inherits the attributes and operations
of the person class.
We also see that employee is a
person, and faculty staff
and administrators are derived from
employee, so they are employees.
In fact, they're also persons.
But notice that a student is not an
employee in this class hierarchy.
Also notice that the is a
relationships are not bi-directional.
For example, a person is not
necessarily an employee because
they could be a student.
You can see how useful a class
diagram can be since it provides a
high level structural overview of
the classes and the relationships.
In the next video, we'll look at
another way of reusing classes
in c++ called composition and see
how it differs from inheritance.